 गुरूदेव दत्त! दत्त पीठ में मैं पहली बार आया हूं, लेकिन इस परंपरा से मैं काफी सालों से जुड़ा हुआ हूं। जो भी नर्मदा तट पर अपना समय बीताते हैं तो नर्मदा तट पर अगर किसी को साधना करने का अवसर मिलता है तो गुरूदेव दत्त के बिना न वो साधना आरंभ होती है, वो साधना की पूर्णावृत्ति है। चाहे आप नरेश्वर जाएं, चाहे गुरुदेश्वर जाएं, दत्त कृपा से ही वो पूरा क्षेत्र प्रभावित है और पूरी नर्मदा की साधना जो है। जो नर्मदा के साधक होते हैं, जो नर्मदा की परिक्रमा करते हैं वे सुबह-शाम दो ही मंत्र बोलते हैं, नर्मदा हरे और गुरूदेव दत्त। ये ही दो मंत्र होते हैं जो पूरी साधना का हिस्सा होते हैं। मुझे खुशी हुई, पिछले सप्ताह गुरू जी गुजरात होकर के आए, कच्छ के रेगिस्तान में होकर के आए। ‘रण उत्सव’ तो देखा लेकिन सबसे बड़ी बात है। वहां पर Kalo Dungar पर गुरूदेव का जन्मस्थल, तीर्थस्थान है और गुरूदेव दत्त की जयंती पर वहां पर एक बहुत बड़ा समारोह होता है, हिंदुस्तान का वो आखिरी स्थान है। उसके बाद रेगिस्तान और रेगिस्तान के उस पार पाकिस्तान है। उस स्थान पर गुरूदेव दत्त का स्थान है और अभी-अभी दत्त जयंती गई तो दत्त जयंती को मनाने के लिए गुरूदेव वहां गए थे और बड़ी प्रसन्नता मुझे भी व्यक्त कर रहे थे। मेरा भी सौभाग्य है, आज मुझे दत्त पीठ आने का अवसर मिला। इस परंपरा ने जो सामाजिक काम तो किए ही हैं, लेकिन हमारे देश में संतों के द्वारा, ऋषियों के द्वारा, मुनियों के द्वारा जो भी होता है, समाज हित में ही होता है, समाज के लिए होता है, समाज के लिए समर्पित होते हैं लेकिन उसकी पहचान नहीं होती है क्योंकि उनको लगता है कि ये तो मेरे कर्तव्य का हिस्सा है इसलिए वो कभी ढोल नहीं पीटते हैं और उसके कारण दुनिया में एक छवि है कि भारत के संत-महंत, साधु-महात्मा या उनका मत-संदर्भ और उनका पूजा-पाठ और उसी में व्यक्त करते हैं लेकिन अगर हम देखेंगे तो हमारे देश में सारी ऋषि परंपरा, संत परंपरा ये समाज उद्धार के लिए लगी हुई है, समाज-सेवा में लगी हुई है। पूज्य स्वामी जी के जितने परिकल्प हैं चाहे वो पर्यावरण की रक्षा का हो या पंखियों की चेतना को समझने का प्रयास हो या उनकी नाद ब्रहम की उपासना हो, नाद ब्रहम की उपासना अप्रतिम मानी जाती है। नाद ब्रहम के सामर्थ्य को हमारी परंपराओं ने स्वीकार किया है और इसलिए बहुत कम लोग होते हैं जो नाद ब्रहम की उपासना कर पाते हैं। ब्रहम का ये रूप जिसको feel किया जा सकता है बाकी ब्रहम के रूप को feel नहीं किया पाता है। नाद ब्रहम है, जिस ब्रहम के रूप को हम feel कर सकते हैं, अनुभव कर सकते हैं और उसकी साधना के द्वारा सामान्य जन को ब्रहम तक पहुंचाने के लिए नाद का माध्यम, ये स्वामी जी ने करके दिखाया है और विश्व के बहुत बड़े फलक पर, हमारी इस महान परंपरा को from known to unknown, क्योंकि सामान्य मानवी गीत औऱ संगीत तो जानता है लेकिन उसे आध्यात्मिक रूप को जानना और उसको ब्रहम से जोड़ना, एक अविरत काम पूज्य स्वामी जी के द्वारा हुआ है, विश्व के अनेक स्थानों पर हुआ है। मुझे भी कुछ ऐसे स्थानों पर जाने का अवसर हुआ है लेकिन मूल स्थान पर आने का आज पहली बार अवसर मिला है, तो मेरे लिए सौभाग्य है। मैं स्वामी जो को प्रणाम करता हूं और उनकी समाज-सेवा के लिए जो काम गिरी है, जो काम चल रहा है, उसको भगवान दत्त के आशीर्वाद मिलते रहे और गरीब से गरीब, सामान्य से सामान्य व्यक्ति की सेवा में ये शक्ति काम है। ये ही मेरा प्रार्थना है, गुरूदेव दत्त!  My dear friends! I am happy to welcome you all to the 13th Conference of Parties to the Convention on Migratory species, at Gandhinagar, the land of the Mahatma Gandhi. India is one of the most diverse countries of the world. With 2.4% of world’s land area, it contributes about 8% of the known global biodiversity. India is blessed with diverse ecological habitats and also has four biodiversity hot spots. They are - the Eastern Himalayas, Western Ghats, Indo-Myanmar landscape and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. In addition, India is also home to around 500 species of migratory birds from across the globe. Ladies and Gentlemen, For ages, conservation of wildlife and habitats has been a part of the cultural ethos of India, which encourages compassion and co-existence. Our Vedas spoke of protection of animals. Emperor Ashoka put great emphasis on prohibiting the destruction of forests and the killing of animals. Inspired by Gandhi Ji, the ethos of non violence and protection of animals and nature has been suitably enshrined in the Constitution of India. It also finds reflection in several laws and legislations. Sustained efforts over the years have led to encouraging results. The number of Protected Areas have increased from 745 in 2014 to 870 in the year 2019 with an area coverage of nearly 1 lakh seventy thousand sq.kms. India's forest cover has increased significantly. The present assessment also indicates that the total forest cover is 21.67% of the total geographical area of the country. India has been championing Climate action based on the values of conservation, sustainable lifestyle and green development model. The range of our initiatives include ambitious target of 450 MW in renewable energy, push towards Electric Vehicles, Smart Cities, Conservation of Water, etc. The International Solar Alliance, the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure, and Industries Transition Leadership with Sweden, have seen encouraging participation from wide array of countries. India is one of the few countries whose actions are compliant with the Paris Agreement goal of keeping rise in temperature to below 2 degree Celsius. Friends, India has initiated focussed species conservation projects/ programmes. These have shown great results. The number of Tiger Reserves has increased from 9 since its formative years, to 50 at present. At present India has the distinction of having a population of almost 2970 tigers. India has achieved its target of doubling the number of tigers two years before the committed date of 2022. I call upon Tiger Range Countries present here and also others to come together to strengthen tiger conservation through sharing of benchmarking practices. India is supporting more than 60% of global Asian elephant population. 30 Elephant Reserves have been identified by our States. India has also taken several initiatives and set standards for conservation of Asian elephants. We have launched Project Snow Leopard to protect the Snow leopard and its habitat in the upper Himalayas. India recently hosted the Steering Committee of the Global Snow Leopard Ecosystem Programme (GSLEP) of 12 Countries, which resulted in New Delhi declaration envisaging development of country specific framework and cooperation between countries for snow leopard conservation. I am happy to share that India would be taking a leadership role in promoting Green Economy including conservation of mountain ecology with people’s participation. Friends, The Gir landscape in Gujarat is the only home for the Asiatic Lion and the pride of the country. We have initiated an Asiatic Lion Conservation project since January 2019 to protect the Asiatic Lion. I am happy to share that, today, the population of Asiatic lions stands at 523. In India, the One-horned Rhinoceros are found in three States of Assam, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Government of India launched the “National Conservation Strategy for the Indian One-Horned Rhinoceros” in the year 2019. The Great Indian Bustard, a critically endangered bird has also been at the focus of our conservation efforts. As part of the captive breeding programme, 9 eggs have been successfully hatched from wild. This has been accomplished by Indian Scientists and Forest Department with technical assistance from International Fund for Houbara Conservation, Abu Dhabi. We have therefore, made the mascot, GIBI- The Great’, as a tribute to the Great Indian Bustard. Friends, India is honoured to host the 13th Conference of Parties to the Convention on Migratory Species at Gandhinagar. As you might have noticed, the CMS COP 13 Logo is inspired by the traditional ‘KOLAM’ from southern India, which has a profound significance in the context of living in harmony with the nature. Friends, We have been traditionally practicing the mantra of “Athithi Devo Bhava”, this has been reflected in the slogan/theme for the CMS COP 13: “Migratory species connect the planet and together we welcome them home”. These species move between countries without any passports or visa, but are messengers of peace and prosperity and it is our responsibility to protect them. Ladies and Gentlemen, India would hold the Presidency of this convention for the coming three years. During its Presidency, India would steer in the following areas: India is a part of the Central Asian Flyway for migratory birds. With a view to conserve the birds along the Central Asian Flyway and their habitats, India has prepared a ‘National Action Plan for conservation of Migratory Birds along the Central Asian Flyway’. India would be happy to facilitate preparation of Action Plans for other countries in this regard. We are keen to take the conservation of migratory birds to a new paradigm with active cooperation of all the Central Asian Flyway Range Countries. I also wish to establish an institutional mechanism for undertaking research, studies, assessments, capacity development and conservation initiatives by creating a common platform. Friends, India has about 7500 kms coastline and Indian marine waters are rich in biodiversity, with innumerable species. India proposes to strengthen its association with the ASEAN and East Asia Summit countries. This would be in sync with the Indo Pacific Ocean Initiative (IPOI), wherein India will be playing a leadership role. India by 2020, will be launching its Marine Turtle Policy and Marine Stranding Management Policy. This will also address the pollution caused by micro-plastics. Single use plastics have been a challenge for environment protection and we in India have been on a mission mode to reduce its usage. Friends, Several Protected Areas in India share common boundaries with the Protected Areas of neighbouring countries. Cooperation in conservation of wildlife through establishment of ‘Trans boundary Protected Areas’, would lead to very positive outcomes. Friends, My Government firmly believes in the path of sustainable development. We are ensuring that development happens without harming the environment. We have released the Linear Infrastructure Policy Guidelines to tailor development in ecologically fragile areas. People are being made important stake-holders in the task of preserving the natural resources for future generations. My Government has been marching ahead with the slogan “Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikaas, Sabka Vishwaas”. Millions of people living in vicinity of forest area in the country have now been integrated in the form of Joint Forestry Management Committees and Eco Development Committees and associated with the protection of forest and wildlife. Friends, I am sure this conference will provide an excellent platform for experience sharing and capacity building in the area of species and habitat conservation. I also hope you will get the time to experience India's hospitality and rich diversity. Thank you. Thank you very much. 